README.md, before:

# Kong Renovate presets

Shared Renovate presets for Kong repositories. Use these as building blocks or extend the default preset for a secure, low-noise setup that works across languages and ecosystems.

## Quick start

Use the default preset to get a secure, low-noise setup that works across languages and ecosystems.

### Floating version (recommended)

Use the floating preset so projects automatically pick up changes:

```json
{
  "extends": ["Kong/public-shared-renovate"]
}
```

#### Why floating version is recommended

- Renovate does not support digest pinning for presets, so exact tags bring no real security gain
- Presets are config, not executable code, and are loaded by Renovate at runtime
- Floating avoids delays and lets security-incidents rules roll out quickly without waiting for a tag bump in every repo

### Pin to a release tag (optional, for holdbacks or downgrades)

Pin only when you must hold back or temporarily downgrade because a change breaks your workflow:

```json
{
  "extends": ["Kong/public-shared-renovate@<VERSION>"]
}
```

If pinned, Renovate will open PRs to bump the preset via the [**renovate-config-presets**](https://docs.renovatebot.com/modules/manager/renovate-config-presets/) manager unless that manager is explicitly disabled. Replace `<VERSION>` with the specific release tag you want to use from the releases' page (for example, the last known good version if you are downgrading).

## What you get by default

A concise summary of the default preset (see [default.json](./default.json) for full details):

- Weekly update cadence on early Mondays
- Safe posture for non-major updates with squash automerge when policy allows; automerge is clearly assigned
- Automerge is gated by required status checks — no merge until required checks pass
- Signed-off commits with consistent semantic type `chore`
- Clear PRs and commits: messages show from → to, including short SHAs for digests
- Merge Confidence badges are shown on PRs for extra signal
- Sensible labels: every PR includes the standard `dependencies` label; you can layer up to two custom labels via overrides
- Extra version discovery via custom managers: Dockerfile ARG versions, Helm Chart appVersion, Makefile versions, and Terraform tfvars
- GitHub Actions kept healthy: grouped sensibly and pinned by commit for security and stability
- Security posture: vulnerability alerts are enabled and surfaced via the base security preset
- Throughput without backlogs: default Renovate rate limiting is disabled
- Reviews: CODEOWNERS reviewers are requested by default
- Keep-up-to-date on demand: add the `renovate/keep-updated` label to any Renovate PR to keep it rebased with its base branch
- Fresh releases are gated briefly by default: `minimumReleaseAge` is 12 days (override locally as needed)

## Common variations

### Add one or two extra labels to all PRs

```json
{
  "extends": [
    "Kong/public-shared-renovate",
    "Kong/public-shared-renovate//overrides/labels(renovate,ci)"
  ]
}
```

### Request one or two reviewers on Renovate PRs

Use the [`Kong/public-shared-renovate//overrides/reviewers`](./overrides/reviewers.json) preset to automatically request specific users or teams on Renovate PRs.

- Accepts up to two reviewers as arguments
- Each argument can be either:
  - A **user** (e.g. `octocat`)
  - A **team** using the `team:` prefix. You must [reference only the last segment of the GitHub team name](https://docs.renovatebot.com/configuration-options/#reviewers). For example, if the full team name is `@organization/foo`, you must pass `team:foo`
- Place this override after the default preset in `extends`, as order matters
- By default, we rely on [`reviewersFromCodeOwners`](https://docs.renovatebot.com/configuration-options/#reviewersfromcodeowners), which assigns reviewers based on `CODEOWNERS` rules. If reviewers are set manually with this override, Renovate will not assign reviewers from `CODEOWNERS` (though repository-level rules may still do so)

> [!IMPORTANT]
> **Reviewers are added when the PR is created and are not updated afterward**

Example:

```json
{
  "extends": [
    "Kong/public-shared-renovate",
    "Kong/public-shared-renovate//overrides/reviewers(octocat,team:foo)"
  ]
}
```

### Adjust update cadence (e.g. run daily)

You can change how often Renovate runs by adding a schedule preset. Place it after the shared preset so it takes effect — the order of items in `extends` matters because later entries override earlier ones.

Example:

```json
{
  "extends": [
    "Kong/public-shared-renovate",
    "schedule:daily"
  ]
}
```

See the options' reference for more: [Renovate configuration options](https://docs.renovatebot.com/configuration-options/)

### Change timezone for scheduling

Renovate interprets schedules in a configurable timezone. If no timezone is set in your config, Renovate [defaults to UTC](https://docs.renovatebot.com/key-concepts/scheduling/#default-timezone)). To change the timezone for your consumer repository, extend the builtin timezone preset with an [IANA Time Zone (TZ) identifier](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_tz_database_time_zones). Place it after the shared preset in `extends` so it overrides any timezone configured by presets you include.

Example:

```json
{
  "extends": [
    "Kong/public-shared-renovate",
    ":timezone(America/New_York)"
  ]
}
```

### Control when automerge can happen

By default, Renovate uses GitHub's platform automerge. When a PR is eligible and all requirements are met (for example, required status checks pass), Renovate enables auto-merge on the PR and GitHub merges it as soon as conditions are satisfied. There is no schedule involved in this default flow.

If you want automerge to follow a schedule, first disable platform automerge by setting [platformAutomerge](https://docs.renovatebot.com/configuration-options/#platformautomerge) to `false`. Then configure a schedule either with [automergeSchedule](https://docs.renovatebot.com/configuration-options/#automergeschedule) directly or via one of the [Renovate schedule presets](https://docs.renovatebot.com/presets-schedule/).

Example using a preset:

```json
{
  "extends": ["Kong/public-shared-renovate", "schedule:automergeWeekdays"],
  "platformAutomerge": false
}
```

Example configuring manually:

```json
{
  "extends": ["Kong/public-shared-renovate"],
  "automergeSchedule": ["every weekday"],
  "platformAutomerge": false
}
```

## Security preset customization examples

These examples show how to adapt the defaults from [base/security.json](./base/security.json) using overrides from [overrides/security/](./overrides/security).

### Remove the default `security` label

Use this if your repository already applies its own risk labels or if you want to reduce visual noise from security PRs. This removes only the `security` label added by the shared preset; Renovate will still add the standard `dependencies` label. It applies to security-scoped updates (vulnerability alerts and security-actions rules). Existing PRs keep their labels; new PRs reflect the change.

```json
{
  "ignoredPresets": ["Kong/public-shared-renovate//overrides/security/labels"],
  "extends": ["Kong/public-shared-renovate"]
}
```

### Replace the `security` label with a custom one

Use this if your team prefers a different label name for security updates or to align with existing dashboards. Pass the desired label as the first argument. GitHub creates the label if it does not exist. Applies to security-scoped updates (vulnerability alerts and security-actions rules). Choose a label your processes already recognize (e.g. `sec-critical`, `security-high`).

```json
{
  "extends": [
    "Kong/public-shared-renovate",
    "Kong/public-shared-renovate//overrides/security/labels(sec-critical)"
  ]
}
```

### Keep the `security` label but add another

Use this if you want to keep the standard `security` label and add another one for routing or automation. Provide up to two labels as arguments, separated by a comma, with no spaces. Order does not matter. Useful for dashboards or rules that depend on labels like `ci`, `platform`, or team-specific tags. GitHub creates labels if they do not exist.

```json
{
  "extends": [
    "Kong/public-shared-renovate",
    "Kong/public-shared-renovate//overrides/security/labels(security,ci)"
  ]
}
```

### Adjust the minimum release age for updates

The `minimumReleaseAge` setting controls how long Renovate waits before creating a PR for a new version. By default, we enforce a **12-day delay** to balance delivery speed with stability and security.

When defined at the root level, this setting applies to all dependencies and update types. For finer control, you can define it inside `packageRules` to apply the delay only to specific dependencies or groups.

```json
{
  "extends": ["Kong/public-shared-renovate"],
  "minimumReleaseAge": "30 days",
  "packageRules": [
    {
      "matchPackageNames": ["left-pad"],
      "minimumReleaseAge": "a billion years"
    }
  ]
}
```

⚠️ **Note:** This setting does not apply to updates triggered by `vulnerabilityReports`. Security-related updates always bypass `minimumReleaseAge` and Renovate will open a PR as soon as a fix is available.

> [!CAUTION]
> #### Reducing the minimum release age
>
> The default value is **12 days**. Lowering it, either globally or within a `packageRule`, must only happen in rare and very specific cases that are reviewed and pre-approved by the security team.
>
> This delay protects against supply-chain risks where a new version might later prove malicious or unstable. It gives the ecosystem time to catch issues, publish advisories, and release fixes before updates reach our codebase. Shortening the window weakens this safeguard and raises the risk of introducing compromised or broken dependencies.

## Deprecations and moved presets

Several legacy top-level presets are now compatibility aliases. Prefer the new locations shown below.

- [`backend.json`](./backend.json) - deprecated alias for the default preset. Use [Kong/public-shared-renovate](./default.json)
- [`go.json`](./go.json) - moved to [Kong/public-shared-renovate//base/go](./base/go.json)
- [`github-actions.json`](./github-actions.json) - moved to [Kong/public-shared-renovate//base/github-actions](./base/github-actions.json)
- [`gateway.json5`](./gateway.json5) - moved to [Kong/public-shared-renovate//base/gateway](./base/gateway.json5)
- [`github-actions-changed-files.json`](./github-actions-changed-files.json) - moved to [Kong/public-shared-renovate//security-incidents/github-actions/tj-actions-changed-files](./security-incidents/github-actions/tj-actions-changed-files.json)
- [`security-base.json`](./security-base.json) - moved to [Kong/public-shared-renovate//base/security](./base/security.json)
- [`security-extended.json`](./security-extended.json) - deprecated alias that composes the base security preset with security overrides for labels and reviewers

## Security incidents

Guidance for creating, wiring, and maintaining security-incident presets is documented in the contributor guide. This includes the full process, directory layout, common patterns, examples, and expectations for deprecation and cleanup.

- Contributor guide: [Security incident response presets](./CONTRIBUTING.md#security-incident-response-presets)
- Presets directory: [security-incidents/](./security-incidents)
- Integration point: [base/security.json](./base/security.json)

Commit message:

feat(renovate): expand override args to 5; move security presets; scope gateway
Broaden preset flexibility, simplify paths, and reduce maintenance by
scoping project‑specific logic. Improve docs to reflect current behavior
and remove duplication.

### What changed

#### Overrides

- `overrides/labels.json` now accepts up to five arguments
- `overrides/reviewers.json` now accepts up to five arguments and
  clarifies team reviewer syntax and behavior

#### Security presets

- Moved `overrides/security/labels.json` to `overrides/security-labels.json`
- Moved `overrides/security/reviewers.json` to `overrides/security-reviewers.json`
- Updated all references in `base/security.json`, README, and examples
- `security-extended.json` remains as a compatibility alias that composes
  the base security preset with the new overrides

#### Gateway preset

- Moved `base/gateway.json5` to `scoped/kong/gateway.json`
- Updated the `gateway.json5` alias to extend the new scoped preset and
  clarified deprecation timeline in its notes

#### Docs and housekeeping

- CONTRIBUTING: removed duplicated guidance and consolidated unique
  advice into Common guidelines
- README and sub‑READMEs updated to reference new paths and capabilities
- Kept JSON strictness and stable ordering; reordered `logLevelRemaps`
  items so `newLogLevel` precedes `matchMessage`

### Why this was implemented

- More flexibility: five args let teams add more labels or reviewers
  without custom forks or local presets
- Clearer mental model: security overrides at top level remove an extra
  directory hop and make preset IDs shorter and easier to discover
- Better scoping: the Gateway logic is team‑specific, so moving it under
  `scoped/kong/` prevents accidental org‑wide use
- Maintainability: deduplicated docs reduce drift and future review time
- Predictability: stable field ordering and strict JSON keep diffs small
  and tooling reliable

Signed-off-by: Bart Smykla <bartek@smykla.com>

README.md, after:

# Kong Renovate presets

Shared Renovate presets for Kong repositories. Use these as building blocks or extend the default preset for a secure, low-noise setup that works across languages and ecosystems.

## Quick start

Use the default preset to get a secure, low-noise setup that works across languages and ecosystems.

### Floating version (recommended)

Use the floating preset so projects automatically pick up changes:

```json
{
  "extends": ["Kong/public-shared-renovate"]
}
```

#### Why floating version is recommended

- Renovate does not support digest pinning for presets, so exact tags bring no real security gain
- Presets are config, not executable code, and are loaded by Renovate at runtime
- Floating avoids delays and lets security-incidents rules roll out quickly without waiting for a tag bump in every repo

### Pin to a release tag (optional, for holdbacks or downgrades)

Pin only when you must hold back or temporarily downgrade because a change breaks your workflow:

```json
{
  "extends": ["Kong/public-shared-renovate@<VERSION>"]
}
```

If pinned, Renovate will open PRs to bump the preset via the [**renovate-config-presets**](https://docs.renovatebot.com/modules/manager/renovate-config-presets/) manager unless that manager is explicitly disabled. Replace `<VERSION>` with the specific release tag you want to use from the releases' page (for example, the last known good version if you are downgrading).

## What you get by default

A concise summary of the default preset (see [default.json](./default.json) for full details):

- Weekly update cadence on early Mondays
- Safe posture for non-major updates with squash automerge when policy allows; automerge is clearly assigned
- Automerge is gated by required status checks — no merge until required checks pass
- Signed-off commits with consistent semantic type `chore`
- Clear PRs and commits: messages show from → to, including short SHAs for digests
- Merge Confidence badges are shown on PRs for extra signal
- Sensible labels: every PR includes the standard `dependencies` label; you can layer up to five custom labels via overrides
- Extra version discovery via custom managers: Dockerfile ARG versions, Helm Chart appVersion, Makefile versions, and Terraform tfvars
- GitHub Actions kept healthy: grouped sensibly and pinned by commit for security and stability
- Security posture: vulnerability alerts are enabled and surfaced via the base security preset
- Throughput without backlogs: default Renovate rate limiting is disabled
- Reviews: CODEOWNERS reviewers are requested by default
- Keep-up-to-date on demand: add the `renovate/keep-updated` label to any Renovate PR to keep it rebased with its base branch
- Fresh releases are gated briefly by default: `minimumReleaseAge` is 12 days (override locally as needed)

## Common variations

### Add up to five extra labels to all PRs

```json
{
  "extends": [
    "Kong/public-shared-renovate",
    "Kong/public-shared-renovate//overrides/labels(renovate,ci)"
  ]
}
```

### Request up to five reviewers on Renovate PRs

Use the [`Kong/public-shared-renovate//overrides/reviewers`](./overrides/reviewers.json) preset to automatically request specific users or teams on Renovate PRs.

- Accepts up to five reviewers as arguments
- Arguments can be either a **user** (e.g. `octocat`) or a **team** using the `team:` prefix
- When referencing a team, you must [use only the last segment of the GitHub team name](https://docs.renovatebot.com/configuration-options/#reviewers). For example, if the full team name is `@organization/foo`, you must pass `team:foo`
- Place this override after the default preset in `extends`, as order matters
- By default, we rely on [`reviewersFromCodeOwners`](https://docs.renovatebot.com/configuration-options/#reviewersfromcodeowners), which assigns reviewers based on `CODEOWNERS` rules. If reviewers are set manually with this override, Renovate will not assign reviewers from `CODEOWNERS` (though repository-level rules may still do so)

> [!IMPORTANT]
> **Reviewers are added only when the PR is created and are not updated afterward**

Example:

```json
{
  "extends": [
    "Kong/public-shared-renovate",
    "Kong/public-shared-renovate//overrides/reviewers(octocat,team:foo)"
  ]
}
```


### Adjust update cadence (e.g. run daily)

You can change how often Renovate runs by adding a schedule preset. Place it after the shared preset so it takes effect — the order of items in `extends` matters because later entries override earlier ones.

Example:

```json
{
  "extends": [
    "Kong/public-shared-renovate",
    "schedule:daily"
  ]
}
```

See the options' reference for more: [Renovate configuration options](https://docs.renovatebot.com/configuration-options/)

### Change timezone for scheduling

Renovate interprets schedules in a configurable timezone. If no timezone is set in your config, Renovate [defaults to UTC](https://docs.renovatebot.com/key-concepts/scheduling/#default-timezone)). To change the timezone for your consumer repository, extend the builtin timezone preset with an [IANA Time Zone (TZ) identifier](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_tz_database_time_zones). Place it after the shared preset in `extends` so it overrides any timezone configured by presets you include.

Example:

```json
{
  "extends": [
    "Kong/public-shared-renovate",
    ":timezone(America/New_York)"
  ]
}
```

### Control when automerge can happen

By default, Renovate uses GitHub's platform automerge. When a PR is eligible and all requirements are met (for example, required status checks pass), Renovate enables auto-merge on the PR and GitHub merges it as soon as conditions are satisfied. There is no schedule involved in this default flow.

If you want automerge to follow a schedule, first disable platform automerge by setting [platformAutomerge](https://docs.renovatebot.com/configuration-options/#platformautomerge) to `false`. Then configure a schedule either with [automergeSchedule](https://docs.renovatebot.com/configuration-options/#automergeschedule) directly or via one of the [Renovate schedule presets](https://docs.renovatebot.com/presets-schedule/).

Example using a preset:

```json
{
  "extends": ["Kong/public-shared-renovate", "schedule:automergeWeekdays"],
  "platformAutomerge": false
}
```

Example configuring manually:

```json
{
  "extends": ["Kong/public-shared-renovate"],
  "automergeSchedule": ["every weekday"],
  "platformAutomerge": false
}
```

## Security preset customization examples

These examples show how to adapt the defaults from [base/security.json](./base/security.json) using security overrides: [overrides/security-labels.json](./overrides/security-labels.json) and [overrides/security-reviewers.json](./overrides/security-reviewers.json).

### Remove the default `security` label

Use this if your repository already applies its own risk labels or if you want to reduce visual noise from security PRs. This removes only the `security` label added by the shared preset; Renovate will still add the standard `dependencies` label. It applies to security-scoped updates (vulnerability alerts and security-actions rules). Existing PRs keep their labels; new PRs reflect the change.

```json
{
  "ignoredPresets": ["Kong/public-shared-renovate//overrides/security-labels"],
  "extends": ["Kong/public-shared-renovate"]
}
```

### Replace the `security` label with a custom one

Use this if your team prefers a different label name for security updates or to align with existing dashboards. Pass the desired label as the first argument. GitHub creates the label if it does not exist. Applies to security-scoped updates (vulnerability alerts and security-actions rules). Choose a label your processes already recognize (e.g. `sec-critical`, `security-high`).

```json
{
  "extends": [
    "Kong/public-shared-renovate",
    "Kong/public-shared-renovate//overrides/security-labels(sec-critical)"
  ]
}
```

### Keep the `security` label but add another

Use this if you want to keep the standard `security` label and add another one for routing or automation. Provide up to five labels as arguments, separated by a comma, with no spaces. Order does not matter. Useful for dashboards or rules that depend on labels like `ci`, `platform`, or team-specific tags. GitHub creates labels if they do not exist.

```json
{
  "extends": [
    "Kong/public-shared-renovate",
    "Kong/public-shared-renovate//overrides/security-labels(security,ci)"
  ]
}
```

### Adjust the minimum release age for updates

The `minimumReleaseAge` setting controls how long Renovate waits before creating a PR for a new version. By default, we enforce a **12-day delay** to balance delivery speed with stability and security.

When defined at the root level, this setting applies to all dependencies and update types. For finer control, you can define it inside `packageRules` to apply the delay only to specific dependencies or groups.

```json
{
  "extends": ["Kong/public-shared-renovate"],
  "minimumReleaseAge": "30 days",
  "packageRules": [
    {
      "matchPackageNames": ["left-pad"],
      "minimumReleaseAge": "a billion years"
    }
  ]
}
```

⚠️ **Note:** This setting does not apply to updates triggered by `vulnerabilityReports`. Security-related updates always bypass `minimumReleaseAge` and Renovate will open a PR as soon as a fix is available.

> [!CAUTION]
> #### Reducing the minimum release age
>
> The default value is **12 days**. Lowering it, either globally or within a `packageRule`, must only happen in rare and very specific cases that are reviewed and pre-approved by the security team.
>
> This delay protects against supply-chain risks where a new version might later prove malicious or unstable. It gives the ecosystem time to catch issues, publish advisories, and release fixes before updates reach our codebase. Shortening the window weakens this safeguard and raises the risk of introducing compromised or broken dependencies.

## Deprecations and moved presets

Several legacy top-level presets are now compatibility aliases. Prefer the new locations shown below.

- [`backend.json`](./backend.json) - deprecated alias for the default preset. Use [Kong/public-shared-renovate](./default.json)
- [`go.json`](./go.json) - moved to [Kong/public-shared-renovate//base/go](./base/go.json)
- [`github-actions.json`](./github-actions.json) - moved to [Kong/public-shared-renovate//base/github-actions](./base/github-actions.json)
- [`gateway.json5`](./gateway.json5) - moved to [Kong/public-shared-renovate//scoped/kong/gateway](./scoped/kong/gateway.json)
- [`github-actions-changed-files.json`](./github-actions-changed-files.json) - moved to [Kong/public-shared-renovate//security-incidents/github-actions/tj-actions-changed-files](./security-incidents/github-actions/tj-actions-changed-files.json)
- [`security-base.json`](./security-base.json) - moved to [Kong/public-shared-renovate//base/security](./base/security.json)
- [`security-extended.json`](./security-extended.json) - deprecated alias that composes the base security preset with security overrides for labels and reviewers

## Security incidents

Guidance for creating, wiring, and maintaining security-incident presets is documented in the contributor guide. This includes the full process, directory layout, common patterns, examples, and expectations for deprecation and cleanup.

- Contributor guide: [Security incident response presets](./CONTRIBUTING.md#security-incident-response-presets)
- Presets directory: [security-incidents/](./security-incidents)
- Integration point: [base/security.json](./base/security.json)
